CORECODE 12/01/22

We communicate with each other in a particular language made of letters or words.
We normally type letters or words through keyboard of the computer, but computer does not understand the words and letters. 
Rather, those words and letters are translated into numbers. This means that computers understand only numbers. 
We know the decimal (base 10) system, and are very comfortable with performing operations using this system, it is also important for us to understand that the decimal system
is not the only system in the world. By studying other number systems such as binary (base 2), quaternary (base 4), octal (base 8), hexadecimal (base 16) and so forth,
we will gain a better understanding of how number systems work in general. 
Number systems are the technique to represent numbers in the computer system architecture,
 every value that you are saving or getting into/from computer memory has a defined number system. 
 As Computer architecture supports following number systems so we need to study them and also need to know the conversion technique between them.

Binary Number System
A Binary number system has only two digits that are 0 and 1. Every number (value) represents with 0 and 1 in this number system. 
The base of binary number system is 2, because it has only two digits.
Applications:
Binary is found in computer technology. All computer language and programming is based on the 2-digit number system used in digital
encoding (is the process of taking data and representing it with discreet bits of information).
The most common application for the binary number system can be found in computer technology. 
All computer language and programming is based on the 2-digit number system used in digital encoding. 
Digital encoding is the process of taking data and representing it with discreet bits of information. These discreet bits consist of the 0s and 1s of the binary system. 

Decimal number system
Decimal number system has only ten (10) digits from 0 to 9. Every number (value) represents with 0,1,2,3,4,5,6, 7,8 and 9 in this number system. 
The base of decimal number system is 10, because it has only 10 digits.
Applications:
We use decimals every day, while dealing with money, weight, length etc. 
Decimal numbers are used in situations where more precision is required, than the whole numbers can provide. 
For example, when we calculate our weight on the weighing machine, we do not always find the weight equal to a whole number on the scale. 
In order to know our exact weight we must understand what the decimal value on the scale means. 
This section deals with the concept of decimals in three important fields of our daily life. 

Hexadecimal number system
A Hexadecimal number system has sixteen (16) alphanumeric values from 0 to 9 and A to F. 
Every number (value) represents with 0,1,2,3,4,5,6, 7,8,9,A,B,C,D,E and F in this number system. 
The base of hexadecimal number system is 16, because it has 16 alphanumeric values. Here A is 10, B is 11, C is 12, D is 13, E is 14 and F is 15.
Applications:
A computer understands information composed of only Zeros and Ones. Therefore, when we type some letters or words, data is processed by the computer in the form of 0s and 1s. 
A computer can understand positional number system where there are only a few symbols called digits and these symbols represent different values
depending on the position they occupy in the number. Computer is usually designed to process hexadecimal number.
For example, the images you see on your computer screen have been encoded with a binary line for each pixel. 
If a screen is using a 16-bit code, then each pixel has been told what color to display based on which bits are 0s and which bits are 1s. 
As a result, 2^16 represents 65,536 different colors! We also find the binary number system in a branch of mathematics known as Boolean algebra.
This field of mathematics is concerned with logic and truth values. Here, statements that are either true or false are then assigned a 0 or 1.
Hexadecimal numbering system is often used by programmers to simplify the binary numbering system.  
Since 16 is equivalent to 24, there is a linear relationship between the numbers 2 and 16.
This means that one hexadecimal digit is equivalent to four binary digits.  
Computers use binary numbering system while humans use hexadecimal numbering system to shorten binary and make it easier to understand.
Hexadecimals are used in the following:

    To define locations in memory. Hexadecimals can characterise every byte as two hexadecimal digits only compared to eight digits when using binary.

    To define colours on web pages. Each primary colour – red, green and blue is characterised by two hexadecimal digits.  The format being used is #RRGGBB.  
    RR stands for red, GG stands for green and BB stands for blue.

    To represent Media Access Control (MAC) addresses. MAC addresses consist of 12-digit hexadecimal numbers. 
    The format being used is either MM:MM:MM:SS:SS:SS or MMMM-MMSS-SSSS. 
    The first 6 digits of the MAC address represent the ID of the adapter manufacturer while the last 6 digits represent the serial number of the adapter.

    To display error messages. Hexadecimals are used to define the memory location of the error.  This is useful for programmers in finding and fixing errors.